---
layout: post
title: "Reason And Revelation"
date: 2022-05-13 21:00:00
categories: books
---

Earlier I was reading this [biography of Abraham
Lincoln](/books/2022/04/13/notes-on-some-biographies.html) and the
section about Deism was interesting. Lincoln was attacked by his
opponents at some points for being an atheist, because he briefly
dabbled with considering himself a "Deist". I remembered reading
sometime before that some founding father types were Deists -
as I check up via Google it sounds like Benjamin Franklin, Thomas
Jefferson and George Washington were. So there is a bit of American
president tradition there.

So I was curious, why bother? Because deism doesn't seem like a big
thing nowadays; people simply call themselves atheists or just don't
really talk about it and answer surveys "no religion" while also not
really calling themselves atheists. I thought I'd read a pro-deism
book to see.

## [The Age Of Reason](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Age_of_Reason)

Man, this book is really something. This is the most anti-Bible book I
ever read. "New atheism" isn't even talking about the Bible any more,
Dawkins and Sam Harris aren't really arguing against the Bible,
they're arguing against people who feel abstractly like "religion is
good" but even so are loosely affiliated.

The Age Of Reason is much more like, hey we need to stop treating this
book like it's the word of God! The book of Mark disagrees with the
book of Luke in these seven points! You can tell by an analysis of
pronouns used that the gospel of Matthew was not actually written by
Matthew! Moses advocates the rape and slaughter of thousands of
innocent children in Numbers 31:13-47! Thomas Paine doesn't literally
use a lot of exclamation points but it feels like he wants to.

This isn't really a debate I can even engage with. It's no longer in
the Overton window, at least where I live in California and with the
set of people I pay attention to on Twitter. It's more like a
portal into the past, giving me a glimpse of a world where the most
intelligent American and European statesmen and scientists would
frequently refer to the Bible as a source of factual knowledge.

There is an interesting idea of "reason vs revelation". Revelation is
another concept I rarely think of nowadays. Thomas Paine is primarily
making the point that revelation to a character in history is no
longer revelation for someone else; now it's trusting the word of
another.

Sometimes you read two seemingly unrelated books and a concept ties
them together. Later on I read...

## [Consilience](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consilience_(book))

Wilson's thesis in this book is roughly that math, science, the social
sciences, arts, ethics, religion, all of these things should fuse into
one unified endeavour. It's an interesting book and I recommend it to
people interested in science but not only interested in science.

The part that reminded me of the "reason vs revelation" concept was a
discussion of why scientists liked doing science. Science is
fundamentally about reason, about using reason to solve problems and
figure out the natural world. But *why* you do science can't be
justified in the same way. In practice different scientists have very
different motivations for wanting to do it in the first place. Some
are religious, some aren't. But the combination basically works.

Perhaps some amount of revelation is necessary. With reason alone, can
you ever get an "ought" from an "is"? Even if you rationally piece
together why some course of action is correct, you find yourself
working back to axioms where you get stuck. How much should we worry
about animal welfare? You can boil it down to a question of one human
life is equal to X chicken lives. What is X? How can this possibly be
answered with reason alone?

## Aumann's Agreement Theorem

This "theorem" has always bugged me. I notice that I blogged about it
[seven years ago](/books/2015/04/25/rationality-ai-zombies-2.html). It
states that rational people should never disagree, and tries to prove
it with some Bayesian reasoning and mathematical arguments.

In practice, groups of smart people very often disagree with each
other. A group of 100 people where everyone agrees on everything, that isn't a
gathering of smart, rational people, those people are groupthinking in
some way.

Perhaps this too is related to the reason vs revelation breakdown. If
a person cannot operate entirely on reason, if they need at least a
little bit of revelation as well, then you cannot entirely agree with
other people. This little bit you disagree with them on, you don't
know if it's because they're smart and rational and they know
something you don't, or if their revelation is at work, putting its
finger on the scale. And they don't really know either. And it's
okay. You just need to figure out some pluralist way to work together
despite not entirely agreeing on everything.

Startups need a little bit of revelation. You need to be a little too
excited, to believe in your idea a little too much, and it doesn't
work to rationally think "Startups require you to believe in your idea
a little too much, so rationally I'm going to take my belief level and
kick it up a notch." It's like Pascal's wager; real belief doesn't
work that way.

## So What?

Do you need more revelation? Do you want more revelation? It's hard to
just sit down and get excited about something. But sometimes it's
contagious, sometimes it's worth seeking out other people who are a
little too excited about their weird ideas. Sometimes it will spread
to you.
