---
layout: post
title: "The Cost Of Efficient Markets"
date: 2022-05-03 22:00:00
categories: economics
---

I love these [Zvi blog
posts](https://thezvi.wordpress.com/2022/04/25/ukraine-post-11-longer-term-predictions/)
where he analyzes prediction markets and states where he thinks they
are overrated and underrated. At the same time, it seems like they
take a ton of work.

One way to look at a prediction market is that you have two forces in
balance. One crowd thinks a proposition is likely to happen, another
crowd thinks the proposition is unlikely to happen, and the price
mediates between these two groups. In this view, the role of money is
to stabilize the system, and you get useful information as a side
effect.

Another way to look at a prediction market is across all predictions,
who is making a lot of money, and who is spending a lot of money? The
ideal prediction market has very intelligent predictions, with people
working hard on intelligent analysis. Are these people making money,
to get paid for their work? Maybe they don't have to be, like on
Metaculus; maybe they will just play for points.

For a predictor to make money on prediction markets, someone else has
to be losing money. Who is willing to consistently lose money on prediction
markets? You might get addicted to prediction markets, mistakenly
overrate yourself, and keep doing it when you shouldn't, like a
gambling addiction. But it seems tough to get a large user base
addicted to prediction markets when there are so many more optimized
types of gambling out there. And friendly regulation for prediction
markets is essentially predicated on it not "feeling like gambling".

Stock markets avoid this problem. The intelligent analysts do get
paid, but they are essentially taking a cut from the huge flows of
money that go into stocks without deep analysis. If every index fund
investor makes an extra 0.1% lower interest because they haven't
optimized their spend, that funds a whole lot of analysts to do
research on optimal price levels.

It seems hard for prediction markets to ever be worth it for the
money. I think they will have to be driven by people who are simply in
it for the "love of the game". In fact, writing this blog post makes
me want to sign up for Metaculus, so that I can bet against some of
the AI wagers that seem overrated....
